Welcome to the last chapter of this MOOC.
This chapter will cover an HTML5 feature that is available in all modern mobile and desktop browsers.
Web Storage.
We will have a look at the options that web developers have to store data for offline availability.
We will use the ARSnova app as an example to see
how the options for session, local storage and Web DB have been implemented.
Offline web apps are a contradiction in terms.
Web apps are usually associated with working online, and here we are talking about offline-online apps.
However, there are many situations when an internet connection is not available and you still want to use a web app on your smartphone or tablet.
For example, if you are on a plane, in a tunnel, if the connection is weak etc.
As soon as you are back online again, you need to sync your offline data with the data on the server.
HTML5 offers several options to store data and the app itself (i.e. the source code) locally on a mobile device.
This feature is called application caching and allows for offline browsing.
Another advantage is that you can open your app even if you have no internet connection.
This way, such an app behaves as resiliently as a desktop app because no time consuming access over the internet is necessary.
Before HTML5, there were also ways of caching data, e.g. in the browser cache.
However, developer don’t have any control over these caches.
You can't send data to the browser cache explicitly or retrieve particular data from the browser cache.
With the Cache Manifest (a file with the extension .manifest), this situation has changed.
In this file, the developer can define the resources (HTML, CSS, JavaScript files, images, etc.) that will be available offline after an initial download.
In the next few videos, we will examine these storage option in a live ARSnova session.
There are two ways of storing data at the client side to make them available to the user when offline:
1. HTTP cookies allow storing small amounts of data that are moved between the server and the browser.
According to RFC 2109, these cookies are limited in number and size (20 cookies, 4 kb each max).
The HTML5 storage options are attributes of the Window object:
window.sessionStorage and window.localStorage
Both options differ with respect to the validity and duration of data persistence.
Session Storage is the context of the session as long as the browser runs, the browser window is open and as long as there is not page reload.
That means: Data stored in Session Storage is available for the duration of a session.
In contrast, data stored in Local Storage is available even after a session is terminated, because the data is not stored in the DOM but on the device itself.
The following options are available at the interface to Session Storage and Local Storage objects according to W3C:
length, setItem(key, value), getItem(key), removeItem(key), key(index), clear().
All these options are not available when using browser caches or HTTP cookies.
The key/value pairs of these options have to be strings.
To transform JS objects into strings or strings into JSON objects, use JSON.stringify() or JSON.parse(). See chapter on JSON.
Please keep in mind, that when using these options of client side data storage, the Same-Origin-Policy applies for JavaScript.
That means, only JavaScript functions from the origin domain (i.e. the domain that was originally accessed) can access data in the manifest file and the local and session storage.
SQL and NoSQL databases offer a far more powerful possibility to store data in a structured way.
The W3C had originally planned to use an SQLite based Web SQL database.
All browsers based on the WebKit engine (Safari, Chrome, new Opera) support this kind of storing data, an extensive SQL database.
Other browsers, e.g. browsers based on the Gecko engine like Firefox, or Internet Explorer, however, don't and support the W3C standard IndexedDB instead.
IndexedDB is a NoSQL database. But since it is not an established standard yet, we decided to use the Apache CouchDB for ARSnova.
NoSQL is schema-free, document based (instead of table-based) and all documents are stored in JSON format.
(Note: No in NoSQL stands for "not only" but was also intended to stress that fact that the old SQL databases were not seen fit for web usage)
Apache CouchDB is an example par excellence for a RESTful HTTP API as a basis for implementing persistent data storage.
Instead of  SQL sequels (SELECT WHERE clauses) to query a database, in CouchDB you query the document collection and aggregate or manipulate the documents as required. A reduced single document is returned.
NoSQL databases borrow from Google's map/reduced programming style that is also known from functional programming languages.
We will examine the various storage options in ARSnova using the Chrome Developer Tools.
Here an example of the Application Cache.
In a live session we will see how Session or Local Storage data is generated and stored in a user scenario.
Each modern application stores its data on the server.
The CouchDB example will show how data storage was implemented in ARSnova.